Ecosystems are unpredictable and the effect a single biota can have on them is usually much greater than y


ou expect. The red fox (Vulpes Vulpes) is a good example of this statement as it has effects on soils, w




ater, small mammals and is affected by climate change and human development. The fox plays an important part in biodiversity because the fox interacts with many different parts of its ecosystem so small changes in its population can cause chain reactions. When the numbers rise or fall many areas of the ecosystem are affected.
	Red foxes are important mesopredators mainly feeding on small mammals like mice and rabbits. Therefore they play a big role in controlling the rodent population which has an indirect effect on plants and vegetation. The more small mammals that are eaten by the fox means less mammals to feast on these plants. The biodiversity area this affects is controlling herbivore population and promoting plant growth, diversity and in turn promoting soin allows for a more secure ecosystem. Also by controlling the herbivore population it keeps the food chain balanced making sure each level stays even which is important for the stability of the ecosystem. A decline in red foxes is also linked to more tick diseases since the fox is the main predator of small mammals which are the host for ticks. So with a smaller fox population the chance for Lyme disease for humans and other animals is also greater. 
	Red foxes dig dens for protection and to breed. Which changes the chemical properties of the soil this is a process called bioturbation. When they dig and stay in the holes their urine, feces, and prey remains make high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus making nutrient-rich "biogeochemical hotspots" that increase soil fertility. Even jusrich soil which improves the microbial activity and can also lower the acidity. In turn these hotspots allow for more habitat diversity because seeds on the foxes' fur can fall into the so


il and when they eat berries it can also be distributed in their den, and this is why sometimes the plant growth near a fox den is more diverse than the other surrounding areas.  Which is how foxes indirectly aid the forest ecosystems and habitats for other species. 
	The fox even plays an interesting role in climate change. When the temperature rises red foxes tend to extend their habitat north, into arctic fox habitats. This creates competition between the 2 species. As the Arctic fox (Vulpes lagopus) is very sensitive to warm temperatures. So climate change first allows red foxes to expand their habitat then arctic fox population declines, then prey species are affected and last soil conditions are affected in the tundra. This is how easily a biota can affect another when something as grave as climate change is involved. Looking at more human influence we can see how much urbanization changes the lives of foxes. This creates habitat loss and forces foxes closer to human habitat. Then they end up eating more human 
food and garbage, which makes the foxes more dependent on human food rather than hunting which will ultimately end in harm to the fox overall and the ecosystem. To answer the  fox population moving to human habitat methods like trapping, poisoning, and shooting are sometimes used causing suffering and reducing fox populations. Foxes can also give diseases like rabies which is just another side effect of them being forced to live near humans. There		 are a few positive things humans bring to the foxes like conserving their habitat and stopping non-ideal interactions. If we look at what happens when red foxes are endangered in a certain area we can see a trophic


 cascade. If the fox population drops herbivore numbers increase, which leads to the over consumption of vegetation whic

h weakens plant diversity. And then can lead to less insects, birds and even eventually less predators at the higher part of the food chain. The fox population can also be affected by larger predators. When the wolf population for example declines due to human actions, then the foxes have less 




 and this can cause an imbalance in the food chain. In areas where this happens foxes will over hunt birds and small mammals wrecking the balances in the ecosystem. They can have both a positive or negative ecological impact depending on what other species are present. Foxes also play an important role in the environment even after death. When they die its carcass becomes a food source for other animals like ravens, eagles and beetles. This is especially important in seasons where food is harder to find for some of these species. Even as their body breaks down, fungi, insects, and bacteria return nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus back into the soil. Which is another way foxes improve the soil and plant growth. Even the death of the fox is important to the ecosystem showing how connected every biota is in our ecosystem.
	The red fox is a main component in our ecosystem helping with biodiversity regulation, soil distribution and water stability. It shows how a single species can have a major effect on an ecosystem in more ways than expected. Its role as a mesopredator is important as it helps control and regulate herbivore population and protect plant life. Its digging enriches the soil and helps with biodiversity. And the 

absence of the fox can even influence the disease rates and the distribution of nutrients across habitats. 

Climate change and human urbanization show how much everything in the environment can have an effect on the 



Vulpes Vulpes, and one tiny change in its population can have a rippling effect on the food chain. Also its relationship with bigger predators can also create a trophic cascade with long term negative effects. Lastly we analyze that even the passing of the fox is needed to keep the food chain intact.
